Document TAG Roles - TAG governance template file (#1116)
cncf/toc: tags/resources/tag-formation-templates/template-roles.md

# Roles within the `<TAG NAME>`

> The TAG includes several key roles that are critical to the group's success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!--- **How to complete this template.**  For each area, select the appropriate roles and responsibilities that align with your TAG's expected operation and adjust the language as necessary. Not all TAGs will need or use all roles, or leverage the time limits suggested, and each TAG may choose to redefine or adjust the scope of responsibilities and activities for a given role. The TOC reserves the right to define what TAG Chairs are responsible for, a sample of which have been provided here. --->

The TAG includes several key roles that are critical to the group's success.
```

Reviewer: this template will need aligned with the details provided here: https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/tags/cncf-tags.md#tag-formation-leadership-and-membership-composition

i would recommend linking that file within the template to assist TAGs in completing this role file after this PR has been reviewed and aligned with that document.

Reviewer: the cncf-tags.md is out of date and needs updated. lets hold off on linking to it until its been modified.

Beyond the roles described in this document the TAG has many contributors, all serving in varying capacities.

- [Roles within the `<TAG NAME>`](#roles-within-the-tag-name)
  - [Chair](#chair)
  - [Technical lead](#technical-lead)
  - [Working Group Lead](#working-group-lead)
  - [Project Lead](#project-lead)
  - [TOC liaison](#toc-liaison)
  - [Emeritus Chair](#emeritus-chair)

## Chair

> A Chair drives the CNCF community efforts of the TAGs domain.
> Chairs are experienced leaders within the CNCF community with rooted expertise in the TAG area. Chairs serve a two-year term but may renew their term by submitting a follow-up application.
> Chair applications go through an [election process](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags/cncf-tags.md#elections) with a final CNCF TOC vote.
> The [leadership election process is described here](template-leadership-election-process.md#chair).
> 
> * Manage the operations and governance of the group.
> * Organize, host, plan and facilitate TAG meetings and events.
> * Reporting to the CNCF TOC on the status of TAG work.
> * Encouraging community members to start projects and working groups.
> * Resolve technical difficulties and decisions related to multiple sub-projects.
> * Remind the community of the scope of the TAG and point out guardrails in discussions, working groups, and projects.
> * Serve as TAG leadership representative in CNCF project discussions and at community events.
> * Evolve the TAG to reflect ongoing changes in the industry.
> * Onboard and mentor new community members.
> * Mentor community members in a leadership role within the TAG.
> * Enforce and promote diversity in TAG work.
> * Enforce and promote good communication in TAG efforts in accordance with the [CNCF CoC](https://www.cncf.io/conduct/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TAG Chairs drive, guide, and coordinate the TAG's efforts within the broader CNCF ecosystem and within their TAG's community. They are supported by Technical Leads in the execution of TAG activities
Chairs may be experienced leaders within the CNCF ecosystem and often have specialized domain expertise. Chairs have term limits, most commonly two years. Chairs continue to serve until removed either by an elected replacement or by the TOC.

Chair applications go through an [election process](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags/cncf-tags.md#elections) with a final CNCF TOC vote.

The [leadership election process is described here](template-leadership-election-process.md#chair).

Chair responsibilities and expectations may include the following or delegation of the following: 
* Manage the operations and governance of the group.
* Organize, host, plan and facilitate TAG meetings and events.
* Reporting to the CNCF TOC on the status of TAG work.
* Encouraging community members to start projects and working groups.
* Resolve technical difficulties and decisions related to multiple sub-projects.
* Remind the community of the scope of the TAG and point out guardrails in discussions, working groups, and projects.
* Serve as TAG leadership representative in CNCF project discussions and at community events.
* Evolve the TAG to reflect ongoing changes in the industry.
* Onboard and mentor new community members.
* Mentor community members in a leadership role within the TAG.
* Enforce and promote diversity in TAG work.
* Enforce and promote good communication in TAG efforts in accordance with the [CNCF CoC](https://www.cncf.io/conduct/)
* Embody and promote excellent leadership in accordance with the [Technical Leadership principles](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/PRINCIPLES.md#technical-leadership-principles)

For more information on TAG Chair responsibilities and expectations, please refer the to the TOC's description of [TAG Chairs](placeholder)
```

Reviewer: @erinaboyd - Leo pulled together an initial list pertinent to the specific TAG operations, I'm sure there are elements here you've already captured in your draft for Chair responsibilities. I've added a placeholder here on line 38 for when we've got them drafted in a PR. I'd think keeping our defined responsibilities and expectations separate from the template here (for use by TAGs) is reasonable. What are your thoughts?

Author: Perfect. I will add the proposed suggestion already, but keep this discussion open, so we don't lose track, to update the placeholder, and add possible other suggestions.

Author: @erinaboyd, if you find a bit of time, could you take at this section? Thanks! :)

> @erinaboyd - Leo pulled together an initial list pertinent to the specific TAG operations, I'm sure there are elements here you've already captured in your draft for Chair responsibilities. I've added a placeholder here on line 38 for when we've got them drafted in a PR. I'd think keeping our defined responsibilities and expectations separate from the template here (for use by TAGs) is reasonable. What are your thoughts?

## Technical lead

A technical lead (TL) expands the bandwidth of the leadership team in terms of covering technical areas, growing the community, organizing events or doing TAG communications.

> Proposals must have a TL or Chair working as an active sponsor.

Author: `Applications must have a TL or Chair working as an active sponsor`

> Proposals must have a TL or Chair working as an active sponsor.

Author: feel free to reopen this discussion, if you have something different in mind 😄

> TLs are experienced contributors within the CNCF community with rooted expertise in the TAG area. TL serve a two-year term but may renew their term by submitting a follow-up application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLs are experienced contributors within TAG, often recognized as successful past project leads, through their triage and planning, content and community management, or other attributes the Chairs determine to be valued for the TAG. TLs may be term limited akin to Chairs, the recommended time-frame is two years, but is dependent upon each TAG to define as their needs and activities warrant.
```

Technical leads go through an [election process](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags/cncf-tags.md#elections) with a final CNCF TOC vote.
The [leadership election process is described here](template-leadership-election-process.md#technical-lead).

**A technical lead is expected to**:
* Establish and guide projects and working groups.
* Resolve cross-sub-project technical difficulties and decisions.
* Propose agenda items for meetings to ensure that open issues are discussed with the group when needed.
* Serving as TAG leadership representative in CNCF project discussions and on community events.
* Onboard and mentor new community members.
* Mentor community members in a leadership role within the TAG.
* Enforce and encourage diversity in the TAG efforts.
* Enforce and encourage good communication in the TAG efforts following the [CNCF CoC](https://www.cncf.io/conduct/).
* Support the TAG Chairs.

> ## Working Group Lead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Working Group or Project Lead
```

> A working group lead is an experienced contributor to the TAG that applies to lead along one or two others a working group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the nature of the work being pursued by the TAG, the TAG Leadership may determine, with TOC liaison approval, that a particular project or effort warrants a working group. A working group or project lead(s) is an experienced contributor to the TAG that volunteers to lead a scoped activity and group alongside one or two others.  The number of leads may vary greatly depending on the defined scope and level of effort. Working Group or Project Leads are confirmed by the TAG Leadership and coordinate closely with the TAG Leadership sponsor for the group to keep them apprised of the group's progress and deliverables.
```

Working groups as community governance structure are defined in the [CNCF TAG](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags) folder.

> TAG Chairs are responsible facilitating the working group applications and make sure that the process is done transparent, accessible and traceable for everyone.
> One of the TAG chairs serves as the working group sponsor and provides guidance to the working group leads.
> Working group leads are signed off by the TAG Chairs and the TOC Liaisons.
> The [leadership election process is described here](template-leadership-election-process.md#working-group-lead).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TAG Leadership is responsible facilitating the working group applications and ensuring the group's work is done transparently, in a manner accessible and traceable for everyone.
One of the TAG Leadership team (may be a Chair or TL) serves as the group sponsor and provides guidance to the group leads.
Group leads are signed off by the TAG Chairs, the approval of the working group is given by TOC Liaisons. Should a group need to exist in perpetuity, the TAG Leadership is expected to provide term-limits or opportunities to rotate WG leadership as part of their governance.
```

> **A working group lead is expected to**:

Reviewer 2: I think 'expected' is a strong word (as in being evaluated in a performance review and that all these responsibilities are needed for a WG tech lead). Imo, in open source we'd like to encourage people to step up (not scare away), be excited, etc, even if they are doing this work part-time/pro bono.

Suggestion:

**A working group lead responsibilities can include the following**:

Author: 👍, added

Unlike working groups, projects require a predetermined time frame and are limited in scope and focused on a central deliverable. The project proposal must be discussed at a meeting and actively communicated to the entire TAG community.
A TAG Chair or TL acts as a sponsor of the project and dedicates a portion of their time to actively support the effort.
TAG Chairs must sign off on the establishment of the project group.
Due to the limited scope of the role, there are no specific requirements for structuring the selection process for the project lead.  
The TAG Chairs are responsible for selecting a suitable project lead and must ensure that the establishment of the project is transparent, accessible, and understood by all.

**A project lead is expected to**:
* Schedule, host, plan and facilitate meetings for the project.
* Provide technical direction unique to the project.
* Plan the project deliverable.
* Report to the TAG on the project status.
* Garner active participation.
* Establish documents and correct permissions for contributions to occur.

> * Contribute content to the project.

Reviewer: Let's consolidate this with the Working Group Leads under a Group Lead function. One may be time-limited/deliverable oriented, the other may be focused groups for ongoing and continual activities. So long as these are defined by the TAG, and approved by the TOC liaisons, the general responsibilities are not much different except in the specifics of implementation.

Author: Yes, good idea. I will merge both sections. 👍

> ## TOC liaison
> 
> The [CNCF TAG](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags) process identifies a TOC Liaison.
> The TAG Chairs are responsible for establishing effective communication with the TOC liaison, including further communication to the wider TOC upon request.
> 
> The TOC Liaison will occasionally prioritize TAG activities, as needed by the TOC, to further the [CNCF mission](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/master/charter.md#1-mission-of-the-cloud-native-computing-foundation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## TOC liaison

The [CNCF TAG](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/tags) process identifies a TOC Liaison.
The TAG Chairs are responsible for establishing effective communication with the TOC liaison, including further communication to the wider TOC upon request.

The TOC Liaison will occasionally prioritize TAG activities, as needed by the TOC, to further the [CNCF mission](https://github.com/cncf/foundation/blob/master/charter.md#1-mission-of-the-cloud-native-computing-foundation).

For more information on TOC Liaisons, their responsibilities and expectations, please refer to the [TOC Liaisons section of CNCF Tags](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/main/tags/cncf-tags.md#toc-liaisons).
```

## Emeritus Chair

After a TAG Chair completes their term, they transition into the role of Emeritus Chair.
This role does not impose any obligations on the TAG, but it acknowledges their committed time and effort.
The role also lets them share information about their previous work and contributions to the TAG.

> An Emeritus Chair retains the same rights/access as in their previous role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An Emeritus Chair does/does not retain the same rights/access as in their previous role.
```
Some do and some don't, it depends on how the TAG chooses to operate.  For instance, now that I am Emeritus for TAG Security, i do retain permissions, but do not exercise them at this time as it would be seen as a conflict (I am no longer the liaison nor am I actively contributing to the group in a meaningful capacity as a STAG member or leader. That may change in the future. 😄 )
